So along with IF statements a second fundamental way of altering the flow or the logic of your code
is a loop.
And we're going to look at two different types of loop.
The first one is the fall it slips a little bit tricky to explain until you see them in action and then
they really are quite straightforward.
Essentially they allow you to run certain lines of code again and again doing usually something slightly
different each time.
So let's see how we set up a flip.
We use the command four to start off our loop and then we need to add some information for a follow
up.
And first off we create a counter variable which counts.
Each time we go through the loop.
So we usually correct that with var and the standard letter that we use for counting is 0.
That's been used since the very early days of computing.
It's likely because I short for index.
So it's the index which counts how many times we've gone through the loop and then we set that value
to something initially.
And usually we start with zero.
So we've created our counter variable.
And we've said it equal to zero so far.
Then we use a semi-colon interestingly not to end the command but just to end that little bit of it
and give the next instruction which is how many times we're going to do the loop.
So if we want to do the loop five times for example we would keep on going as long as I is less than
5 say the first time I'm going to be 0.
Then the next time it's going to be 1.
Next time it's going to be two.
Next time it's going to be three then four.
So that will be five times.
So that's the instruction to keep going as long as I had less than five.
The final instruction the third and final instruction is what to do to I each time and the usual thing
is to add one to I.
So it becomes 0 1 2 3.
Each time you've gone through the loop there are two ways to do that.
The most kind of obvious way is to
do that.
So each time you go through the loop take I set it to the old value of i plus 1.
So that essentially increments each time.
That's a bit wordy though.
And we use it a lot in loops.
So there's a shortcut way of doing it which is I plus plus which is quite a neat way saying just add
one to I and that works in pretty much every programming language.
So it's a pretty cool thing to learn.
All right.
So now we've set up a loop.
It starts off without count a variable equal to zero.
It adds one to our count variable each time and it keeps going as long as our counter variable is less
than 5.
So then we need to give the instructions of what we want to happen.
Each time the loop takes place.
And just like with functions we do this in curly brackets.
So the same as if statements as well.
And for now all will do is alert the value of.
So this should give us zero.
And then one and then two and then three and four and then stop.
With any luck Let's take a look.
So yep 0 1 2 3 4 stop William.
So that's the long and the short of it really.
Let's just play around with a little bit to get you thinking if we change that two or three.
And that to a 7.
Can you tell me what this is going to let go for it.
Did you get it right.
Let's see.
So it starts at 3 and 4 and 5 and 6 then stop because it keeps going as long as it's less than seven
All right here's a challenge for you.
Can you change it so that it's instead of going up by one each time it goes down by one each time and
we get five four three two one effort
how do you manage that.
So we're going to start with I is equal to five.
We want to keep going as long as I is greater than zero because we want five four three two one and
then stop.
And instead of I plus plus hopefully you get this decreased by one each time we use I minus minus.
So this should give us 5 4 3 2 1 5 4 3 2 1 billion.
All right.
Feel free to play around with that much more and see if you can find different ways of doing things.
But I'm actually going to combine four loops and arrays because they are really a match made in heaven.
Going back to our example when we introduced arrays of tweets if we want to display all the tweets and
we don't know how many there are.
What we're going to need to do is loop through the array.
So we start with the first treat display that move onto the second tweet display that et cetera et cetera.
And that's actually really easy to do with loops.
So let's set up our array of tweets
I kind of remember what my inane tweets were last time.
Something like this.
I love cornflakes.
And we'll have one more sets.
Night night.
And a smiley face.
Lovely.
I quite like this guy.
All right.
So I'm going to set this as a challenge then can you display or let each of the values in this tweets
array using for
k.
Hope you managed it.
All we need today is set I back to zero at the beginning.
And we want to keep going.
So remember this is the zeroth tweet.
This is Tweet number 1 and this is Tweet number two.
So we want to keep going as long as I is less than three.
We want to be 0 1 2 and then stop.
And of course we want to go up by 1 each time.
So I'll change that back to I plus plus.
And then we're going to alert tweets.
Which item do we want.
We want the item.
So this will be tweets 0.
The first time around tweets one the second time round and tweets to the third time round.
So let's have a look and see if that works.
Hi everyone comes up first.
Excellent.
I love cornflakes.
And then night night William I hope you manage something like that now.
Extra bonus points for you if you realized that in our Twitter program as we mentioned we don't necessarily
know how many tweets there are going to be.
So what we can do is change this three here to as we saw in the array's video we can use tweets dot
length to give us the number of tweets in the game.
So tweets don't length of the moment is one to three but the great advantage of the code as it is now
is that I could add a fourth tweet say Sweet dreams when I forgot my semi-colon there as well.
And then without updating this code at all.
Now display.
With any luck.
All four tweets.
One two three four.
There we go.
So that's how we loop through an array with a flip.
And that is a really useful thing to be able to do with pretty much any web app or web site that we're
working on.
Little final challenge for you then can you change this code so that instead of alerting all of the
tweets it displays each of them on a separate line.
Go for it.
All right I hope you manage that.
Not that easy but not too tricky either.
That's create a div for outwits which will give an ID of tweet div and then what I'm going to do is
create a variable called Tweet string which is going to hold the HGL for my tweets.
And then at the very end I'll update the tweet div ID to have the content of tweet string say each time
we go through the loop I'm going to take tweet string and I'm going to set it equal to whatever it was
before.
So tweet string and then I'm just going remember that I've got the equals incorrectly place to the answer
that's a tweet string.
So we're taking tweets string and we're setting equal to whatever it was before.
Plus and we're going to need a paragraph tag and then the tweet item itself.
So tweets.
And then we'll close the paragraph tag.
So this will add a paragraph containing the new tweet to tweet stream.
And finally when we're done I'm going to take my tweets.
Dave and at the HMS literate it so document dot get element by ID.
The ID is tweet Dave and we want to set the HDMI all of that to be equal to a tweet string.
All right let's take a look or OK.
Now this is good.
I've got everything that I wanted and it's on separate lines but I've got this interesting undefined
up here.
So I have a quick moment to think about why we might have this undefined at the top there.
Did you get it.
It's because even though we've created the variable tweet string.
We haven't said it equal to anything.
So at the moment when we define it it's equal to undefined because it's not been set equal to anything.
So the first time we do this we're taking tweets string and we're setting it equal to tweet string which
doesn't have any value.
So that's why we've got this weird undefined at the very beginning there.
And then we're adding other stuff to it.
So the lesson from that is you should always give your variables a value even if it's just an empty
string.
So this tells javascript that we're going to start off with an empty string and then we can add some
information to it later on.
So if we now run that again we should find that the undefined disappears.
Great I hope you managed to do most of that by yourself and I hope you're beginning to see the power
that we can get by combining for loops and arrays for displaying large amounts of data in our web sites.
Good stuff.
Now as I mentioned there are two types of loops and we've looked at four loops here.
But actually my favorite type of loop is a while loop.
And we'll see how that differs and why we might use each different type in the next video.